can artificial intelligence make you a
better public speaker there is a brand
new tool that you may have heard of
called chat GPT by open Ai and you can
ask this chat type tool all sorts of
questions about anything and that does
not exclude public speaking you can ask
this tool questions about public
speaking I did just that because I
wanted to challenge and see what kinds
of advice this artificial intelligence
tool could give for how to utilize body
language when speaking in public is chat
GPT better than my YouTube videos we're
about to find out hey everyone my name
is Wade Patterson I am passionate about
impactful communication I want to help
make you a better public speaker and a
better Communicator in general if that
sounds like something you're interested
in please subscribe to my channel I do
my best to put out a lot of great video
content that will help you in all areas
of public speaking and I'm excited to
see this community growing and providing
more value to more individuals so as I
mentioned I wanted to challenge chat GPT
and see what type of advice this AI tool
would give for how to use body language
when speaking in public by the way I
have a video out there which I will link
to in the description about how to
leverage body language at least my
opinion so you can be the judge you can
go check out that video and you can
compare it to the tools that we're going
to see or the ideas from chat GPT and
you can be the judge of who said it
better but I'm going to go through chat
gpt's advice and then analyze each point
breakdown by breakdown so stay tuned for
that so as I mentioned I asked how do I
use body language effectively when
speaking in public the response I
received was using body language
effectively when speaking in public can
help engage your audience and reinforce
your message here are a few tips for
using body language effectively when
speaking in public and the tool goes on
to give me five tips tip number one
stand up straight and maintain good
posture this will make you look
confident and help you project your
voice
tip number two use gestures to emphasize
your points and make your presentation
more interesting avoid overusing
gestures as this can be distracting
tip number three make eye contact with
your audience this will help engage them
and make them feel like you are speaking
directly to them
tip number four use facial expressions
to show emotion and help convey your
message smiling can help put your
audience at ease while a serious
expression can help emphasize an
important point
and the final tip we receive use your
body to move around the stage or
presentation area this can help to keep
your audience engaged and prevent them
from getting bored overall the key is to
use body language in a natural and
authentic way that enhances your message
and engages your audience I'm not gonna
lie that is a pretty fantastic answer
credit to chat GPT it's almost scary how
good artificial intelligence is getting
at answering questions such as these I'm
going to break down each point one by
one and then at the end of the video I'm
going to add in a few things that chat
GPT could have Incorporated with their
answer that I include in my video the
first tip is a great one stand up
straight use good posture because that
is going to exude confidence and command
the attention of your audience I think
chat GPT hit the nail on the head with
this tip one of the things I would add
is that many people as a tendency grab
onto something when they're public
speaking it's almost as that they use
these things as a crutch or for
stability for example people will hold
on to a lectern if they're standing
behind a lectern and have their notes
there they will grip onto the lectern
and that prevents them from being able
to use their hands when speaking and
incorporating body language other things
we see from time to time are people
holding on to the chair so if they were
sat down and then they stand up to speak
they will hold on to the back of the
chair and as chat GPT mentioned you
don't want to do that you want to take a
step away give yourself the space stand
up confidently and project that
confidence I love the second tip that
the artificial intelligence tool
provides which is to use gestures but
don't overuse gestures why do we use
gestures body language is important
because so much of the way we
communicate a message is non-verbal I've
given this example in many videos in the
past that I can say two sentences and
they can have completely different
meeting even if they have the exact same
words a quick example I'm having such a
great time
versus I am having such a great time
in the second example you know that I'm
being sincere and that I'm really
enjoying myself in the first example it
looks like I'm being sarcastic or that
I'm not actually having a good time with
that in mind body language and gestures
are incredibly important but what I love
chat GPT adds into the answer is that
overusing gestures looks unnatural and
it can take away from your speech and
this is what I find with new speakers
who are trying to incorporate Body
Language they overdo it they really
really think about how can I make
certain gestures but they end up looking
robotic or insincere unnatural so it is
important incorporate gestures where you
can but don't overdo it because that
let's be honest looks a little bit
cheesy I have to say with the third tip
chat GPT delivers they are three for
three and that is incorporating eye
contact eye contact is very important
because the audience will feel included
and they will be less likely to get
distracted if you make eye contact with
the people in the room and you're able
to hold that eye contact they're less
likely to go on their phones or look
down at their computer or anything like
that because you're keeping them
accountable they know that you will be
looking directly at them at some point
what a lot of new speakers do is if
they're lacking confidence they look
down because it's tough to look people
in the eyes or if they're thinking and
having trouble finding their words
they'll look up these are two common
things that we see if you can really
focus on not just making eye contact
with one person but gradually around the
room and at key points actually holding
that that eye contact so you can finish
your thought it is an incredibly
powerful tool as a speaker that is going
to engage your audience I'll be honest
the fourth tip from chat GPT is one that
I did not include in my video on how to
use body language effectively which
going forward I'm going to use this one
because it is such a great tip and that
is to remember about the facial
expressions and that that is also part
of body language because if you are
smiling it is going to make your
audience feel at ease if you're talking
and then chat GPT brings up the point if
your face turns more serious that will
signify that you're about to talk about
something important or something that
isn't a laughing matter and that in its
own way will draw your audience in as
well so when we talk about body language
we're often thinking about the hand
gestures but remember that it has to do
with the facial expressions as well the
fifth and final tip from chat GPT was to
move around the presentation area and
that is another great tip but but I will
add in the caveat that these movements
should be purposeful sometimes people
move around for the point of moving
around and almost like the point on
overusing gestures that can have the
same effect if you move too much it may
take away from your message what I would
suggest is make movements purposeful if
you're talking about something that's
really important move closer toward your
audience and maybe lower your voice to
really draw them in if you're talking
about playing a baseball game and you
hit the ball and you're running to the
base make that motion almost as if
you're running around the diamond in
that way that adds to the story by
making these movements purposeful and
not just wandering around for no purpose
at all it's going to engage the audience
more and it's going to have a more
dramatic effect on the message you're
trying to convey so I will say overall
those are five incredible tips I'm a
little nervous that my YouTube channel
is going to be put out of business by
artificial intelligence with information
like this but I'm going to add a couple
other things that I Do cover in my body
language video that chat GPT missed out
on
the first is this idea of what I call
the invisible table when people are
trying to incorporate their hands more
they bring their hands up and then they
almost have it at this right angle where
they stay like this when they're not
using them and they just bring them up
this much the problem with that is that
you want to allow your hands to go back
down to your side when you're talking
and then bring them up by having this
invisible table it almost makes us look
a little bit robotic and I see it from
so many new speakers who are trying to
use their hands more and incorporate
Body Language they don't let them fall
between this angle they keep them around
here allow those hands to fall to the
side and then bring them up when you're
using them to talk about different
things and then they go back down try
not to keep those hands in your pocket
either again this takes away from the
confidence simply let them rest to your
side another point to be mindful of I
know chat GPT suggested moving around
the stage which is a great idea but be
mindful that you don't have your back to
audience members I understand that
sometimes this is unavoidable depending
on the room layout and where you are
presenting but I have seen some speakers
who if the room is u-shaped they go and
they try to really present to one side
of the room well the other side of the
room is just staring at your backside
and you may have a lovely backside but
what we want is for them to be able to
see your face and the front of your body
and do that as much as possible if you
come up now and then and it's a quick
turn that type of thing that's okay
that's totally fine but you don't want
to be doing 90 of your speech with your
back to some part of the audience be
mindful about where your audience is and
be inclusive to everybody who is in the
room a final tip is to be aware of your
own gesture Tendencies which we all have
one thing I didn't realize until I
joined a Toastmasters Club is that when
I was talking I would only bring up my
right hand when talking about things and
it wasn't until a club member pointed
out hey Wade guess what you have a left
hand as well you should be incorporating
both of these when speaking that was
something I had to learn about myself
and you will have a tendency just like
everybody in the world has gesture
Tendencies and once identified you can
be mindful of it so that when you do
stand up and you present that will be in
the back of your mind so that you don't
do that one thing that is a little bit
awkward that you know what that is and
you can focus on incorporating your
whole body and using body language very
effectively like I said before chat GPT
well done with those tips those were
incredible I agree with all of them I
just wanted to sprinkle in a few
additional ideas if you got value out of
this video and if you want to keep my
YouTube channel alive because clearly AI
has some impressive material to be
sharing with you please subscribe to my
channel turn on notifications it helps
me grow it allows me to create more
videos just like this thanks so much and
have an awesome day thank you so much
for watching this video if you are
looking for a little bit of coaching
help with your next speech I am
providing one-on-one evaluations my
contact email is in the video
description reach out to me and let's
discuss what that could look like